# Configuration {#ch:config}

All your settings are saved using the gconf database[^1].

The configuration druid uses the gconf-database and the save-values
command will rewrite it, just like the and button in the preferences.

With special care the gconf database can be edited, to set
defaultvalues. To restore a totally screwed configuration simply remove
it. The next time you start  the configuration wizard will pop up to
create your settings from the defaults.

With Settings/Preferences (dt: Einstellungen/Einstellungen)  can be
configured during runtime, the changes are (as seen above) saved in .
This file can be copied to any new user, who wants to share the same
instrument.

Any of the settings provides a small help text for your information.

## Hardware folder {#sec:conf:hardware}

Hardware/Card

:   Choose hardware: see also section
    [\[sec:HwI-PlugIns\]](#sec:HwI-PlugIns){reference-type="ref"
    reference="sec:HwI-PlugIns"} about Hardware-Interface (HwI) plug-ins
    for specific details.)

    :   no hardware connected, for data analysis, using internal
        dummy-mode.

    :   Signal Ranger is connected, a running SPM DSP code is expected.

    :   A Intelligent Scanning Probe Hardware Module is expected at the
        device. (pci32.o, pc31.o at /dev/pcdsp (see later) + running on
        DSP interface board

    :   use the RHK internet device

    ...

    :   some more experimental HwI modules may show up.

Hardware/Device

:   Path to the device used by the specific hardware. Typical are , ,
    ...

## Instrument folder {#sec:conf:instr}

Instrument/Type

:   Select one of STM, AFM, SARLS, SPALEED, CCD. This determines the of
    the main window.

Instrument/Name

:   Any name you want to associate with your instrument. Please limit to
    30 characters.

### Inst-SPM folder

Instrument/X,Y,ZPiezoAV

:   SPM Piezo sensitivity in A/V.

Instrument/BiasGain

:   Gain of the bias-volatge.

Instrument/nAmpere2Volt

:   Tunnel amplifier sensitivity:

Instrument/nNewton2Volt

:   for AFM Setpoint in nN, 1 for 1nN = 1V

Instrument/dHertz2Volt

:   NC AFM Setpoint

Instrument/ScanOrgCenter

:   Specific to hardware setup

Analog/DigRangeIn

:   positive maximum value for X,Y,Z,...AD-conversion with respect to
    VoltMaxIn. The converters have to be bipolar (e.g. $\pm 10\;$V)

Analog/VoltMaxIn

:   AD Voltage corresponding to DigRangeIn

Analog/DigRangeOut

:   positive maximum value for X,Y,Z,...DA-conversion with respect to
    VoltMaxOut. The converters have to be bipolar (e.g. $\pm 10\;$V)

Analog/VoltMaxOut

:   DA Voltage corresponding to DigRangeOut

Analog/V1-V9

:   Piezoamplifier Settings, typically: 1,2,5,10,15.

Analog/VX/Y/Zdefault

:   Preferences at for programm startup gain selections

Analog/VX0/Y0/Z0default

:   Preferences for programm startup gain selections for Offset, only
    essential if analog offset adding is used.

### Inst-SPA folder

Instrument/X,YCalibV

:   SPALEED: X,Y calibration factor, 1V at DA $\rightarrow$ $\pm 10\;$V
    resp. $15\;$V at octopol front/back.

Instrument/EnergyCalibVeV

:   factor\*Volt = energy in eV

Instrument/Sensitivity

:   $\textrm{BZ} = \textrm{U} \cdot \textrm{Sensitivity} /
    \sqrt{\textrm{Energy}[\textrm{eV}]}$

Instrument/ThetaChGunInt

:   Half angle between channeltron and electron gun (intern).

Instrument/ThetaChGunExt

:   unused.

Sample/LayerDist

:   Atom layer distance of the sample in Ångstroem, used for calculation
    of phase (energy in ).

Sample/UnitLen

:   unused.

## DataAq folder

In this section deals with the assignment of data sources to  channels.
The particular configuration depends on your data acquisition hardware
and is unique for each instrument. The following explanations are based
on the Signal Ranger DSP board.

For the Signal Ranger board the hardware channel assignment to the data
sources is defined as shown here:

::: {#tab:preferences:dataaq}
  Channel Descriptor    Name      Notes
  --------------------- --------- ----------------------------------------------------------
  DataAq/PIDSrcA1       Topo,\*   Z: generated by the Feedback
  DataAq/PIDSrcA2...4   ---       not used
  DataAq/DataSrcA1      AIC5      AIC5: I, Force, dFrq, ...what is used as feedback signal
  DataAq/DataSrcA2      AIC0      AIC0 input (Fric)
  DataAq/DataSrcA3      AIC1      AIC1 input (Damp., opt. FUZZY source)
  DataAq/DataSrcA4      AIC2      AIC2 input
  DataAq/DataSrcB1      AIC3      AIC3 input
  DataAq/DataSrcB2      AIC4      AIC4 input
  DataAq/DataSrcB3      AIC5      AIC5 input
  DataAq/DataSrcB4      AIC6      AIC6 input
  DataAq/DataSrcC1      dIdV      LockIn 1st of AIC5 (32bit)
  DataAq/DataSrcD1      ddIdV     LockIn 2nd of AIC5 (32bit)
  DataAq/DataSrcE1      I0        test:FB-Integrator (LockIn-I0 avg) (32bit)
  DataAq/DataSrcF1      Counter   SR-CoolRunner Counter if equipped (experimental) (32bit)

  : Signal Ranger board the hardware channel to  data sources assignment
  definitions. I0, Counter are experimental and may change any time
:::

The field "Name" can be used to give the input a real name instead of
"AIC0" you can used "PLL-dF" or what ever you like. Do not use a ","
except for ",\*" to set a default, the text behind it will be ignored.

## Probe folder

-- obsolete --

## Folder Adj.

-- obsolete -- see Entry-Popup menu!

Configuration of Value-Slider:

Adjustments.Name/min,max for Area (please care for min $<$ max !!),
Adjustments.Name/step,page for stepwidth at Cursor, Click.

## Paths folder

Path/Logfiles

:   

Path/Data

:   

Path/RemoteFifo

:   path to remote fifo (read only by )

Path/RemoteFifoOut

:   path to control fifo (wo by )

Path/Plugins

:   Additional Plugin searchpath

## User folder

User/SaveWindowGeometry

:   Always , for future use...

User/Unit

:   XYZ-Einheit: Choice of AA, nm, um, mm, BZ, sec, V, 1

User/HiLoDelta

:   Checking distance of array for calculation of Min/Max for
    Autodisplay, 1 = all points visited.

User/FileType

:   ( possible, but out of date.)

User/NameConvention

:   : Auto enumeration with 001, 002, ..., : Auto enumeration with aaa,
    aab, ...

User/SliderControlType

:   : Omicron Slider Control, : Besocke

User/Palette

:   path to palette image (may be altered at runtime) See also \...

## GUI folder

GUI/layerfields

:   Select here, if you want use layered (3d) scans.

[^1]: GConf: try the gconf-editor to explore the GXSM settings, path:
    /apps/gxsm2!
